---
layout: page
title: Network for Mouse Genetics
subtitle: 
bigimg: /img/DNA.jpg
---

<p align="right">
<i>In collaboration with Raphael Reis, Gianni Giusto and Lucas Zweili</i><br>You can access the full data story <a href="https://drive.google.com/file/d/1c0hUkdUSp3KjXDLsiT5FXr9J8zGLVsx5/view?usp=sharing"> here </a><br></p>

<p class="used_tools">Key tools: python, networkx, pygsp, sklearn, pytorch, git </p>

## Introduction
Wikipedia describes the phenotype as _the composite of the organism's observable characteristics or traits. (...) An organism's phenotype results from two basic factors: the expression of an organism's genetic code, or its genotype, and the influence of environmental factors. Both factors may interact, further affecting phenotype._  <br>

In fact, the study of both the genetic material and its expression rates (which depends on the environmental factors) gives useful informations when it comes to predict a phenotype. Each approach presents besides its own advantages and inconvenients.


* The genetic information on one hand can be systematically sequenced and analyzed for any individual. However, an extensive amount of the DNA is silenced in most cells through <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Epigenetics#Molecular_basis">epigenetic phenomenon </a>such as chromatin condensation leading to a lot of noisy and useless information in the genetic data.
* On the other hand, protein expression levels are closer to the phenotype in that sense that the phenotype will directly depend of these. However, many techniques exist to quantify the concentration of any protein level, and these levels can vary according to many factors, or not be measured at all, leading to sparse dataset.

## Implementation
The features we were working on where <a href="https://isogg.org/wiki/Single-nucleotide_polymorphism">Single Nucleotide Polymorphism</a> (SNP) which represent specific, pointwise mutations present each of the parent of the H0 generation: each of the specimen of the H1 generation inherits the SNP from one or the other parent for each gene: however, on the genome, closeby genes are likely to be inherited from the parent due to the phenomenon of <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chromosomal_crossover">Crossing Over </a>. Our genetic dataset consisted of binary values representing the parent from which the offspring inherited its genome from for a given gene. In addition, several levels of protein expression were measured for various gene and represented the expression data.

Our approach consisted thus in trying to find a network-based technique which would be able to take advantage of the best of both dataset.
As a first step, we built a genetic-similarity based graph for the different mouse strains.(<i>further referred to as genetic graph</i>) Based on this graph, I developed a grid-search approach evaluating different combinations of gene/parameters in order to obtain a list of genes for which we would have chances to perform decently despite the extensive amount of missing data and gene complexity


We decided to focus on the hair coat color: in order to predict it, we used subsequently the following methods:
* Logistic regression
* Tikhonov classification
* Harmonic classification
* Graph Neural Network
* Recursive Feature selection (RFE)

<iframe src="https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/e/2PACX-1vS8hAgDilitcTKpKSKJxjqbmZ591arP6Kw6plS2lReE3z5BB4j26hAglHRaXxhG3XCWLm4ts06zfW9U/embed?start=false&loop=false&delayms=3000" frameborder="0" width="960" height="569" allowfullscreen="true" mozallowfullscreen="true" webkitallowfullscreen="true"></iframe>
These methods, along with the RFE allowed me to reach an accuracy of 98% : after further investigation, it turned out that the remaining features positions (SNP) coincided perfectly with the genes Myo5a and Tyrp1, which are mainly responsible for the hair coat color in the BXD strain.

## Retrospective Improvements
Looking back on the project, using a feature selection earlier in the development could have saved a lot of time. In fact, network methods might have not been the best tools to go for due to the sparsity of the expression level datasets: classical ML techniques might probably perform better. However, this constraint was due to the fact that this project was developped along with the course "A Network tour of Data Science".

You can access the full report <a href= "https://drive.google.com/file/d/1c0hUkdUSp3KjXDLsiT5FXr9J8zGLVsx5/view?usp=sharing"> here </a>

