---
layout: page
title: A ML approach to determine chemical shifts in NMR
subtitle: Lab. of Computational Science and Modeling (EPFL)
bigimg: /img/NMR.png
---
<p align="right"><i>In collaboration with Gianni Giusto and Maxime Epars</i><br> 
You can access the full report <a href="https://drive.google.com/file/d/1tVm0JO-4Iun7YRKL3Aj9q5Z8FvDQ8Usb/view?usp=sharing" > here </a>
</p>
## Introduction

Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is a method used to determine the chemical structure of a molecule based on the principle of the resonance frequency: any nuclear spin in a given structure depends on its chemical local environment (i.e. _shielding_) The change in resonance frequency compared to a standard reference is represented by the chemical shift. Solid-state NMR represents a specific type of this powerful method tailored to amorphous solids where, by definition, magnetic fields are orientation-dependent. Accurate methods using plane wave density functional theory (DFT) have been developed to calculate chemical shifts. However, these techniques are computationally costly and hence fail to compute the latter for large or complex molecular structures.
Machine learning tools may potentially offer a new way to compute the chemical shifts with a reasonable computational cost while maintaining high accuracy.

# Implementation
The aim of the project was then to build a model able to predict chemical shieldings of hydrogen atoms from a few hundreds of crystal structures from the <a href="https://www.ccdc.cam.ac.uk/solutions/csd-system/components/csd/"> Cambridge Structural Database (CSD)</a>  based on their local environment. Note that the chemical shift can easily be computed from the shielding value and its reference. The challenge consisted therefore in determining this shield, which was precisely the target of the considered training task.

# Methods
To tackle the challenge, we implemented a pipeline using various methods including Linear Models, Feature Selection, Neural Networks (various pytorch architectures), Ensemble methods and KernelPCA.<br> In addition, some metric were developped for the special needs of the project.

# Results
A final MSE of 0.53 was obtained on a 4-fold CV, thus outperforming largely the initial linear proposed linear models.

  Special thanks to Prof. Michele Ceriotti and Felix Musil for their help and letting us work on this dataset.
